Title: Project Euler problem 5 - Smallest multiple
Date: 2018-12-15 19:00
Category: Project Euler
Tags: prime numbers, project euler, python
related_posts: 
Slug: project-euler-problem-5
Authors: Søren
Summary: Solution to the fifth Project Euler problem. Finding the smallest positive number that is evenly divisible by all numbers between 1 and 20.

[Link to problem on Project Euler homepage](https://projecteuler.net/problem=5)

[Link to Github repository](https://github.com/fractalleaf/project-euler/tree/master/p005)

## Description

2520 is the smallest number that can be divided by each of the numbers from 1 to 10 without any remainder.

What is the smallest positive number that is evenly divisible by all of the numbers from 1 to 20?

## Brute force
In the simplest brute force solution to the problem one simply iterates over all integers and does trial division until a solution is found


```python
from itertools import count

def p005(k):
    
    for i in count(k):
        for j in range(2, k+1):
            if i % j != 0:
                break
            if j == k:
                return i

for LIMIT in [10, 20]:
    print("")
    print("limit = {}".format(LIMIT))
    print("Result for ndigit = 2: {}".format(p005(LIMIT)))
    %timeit p005(LIMIT)
```

    
    limit = 10
    Result for ndigit = 2: 2520
    827 µs ± 7.27 µs per loop (mean ± std. dev. of 7 runs, 1000 loops each)
    
    limit = 20
    Result for ndigit = 2: 232792560
    1min 18s ± 1.09 s per loop (mean ± std. dev. of 7 runs, 1 loop each)


## Optimisation

One may naively think that the smallest integer divisible by all integers from 1 to $k$ is the product of all integers between 1 and $k$, also known as the factorial $k!$. However, the brute force results shown above are much smaller than the factorials ($10! = 3628800$ and $20! = 2432902008176640000$).

The [Fundamental theorem of arithmetic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fundamental_theorem_of_arithmetic) states that *every integer greater than 1 either is a prime number itself or can be represented as the product of prime numbers and that, moreover, this representation is unique*. For example the $10 = 5\times 2$ and $12 = 2 \times 2 \times 3$.

Thus, to find the smallest number evenly divisible by all numbers between 1 and $k$ we need the product of all prime factors such that each composite number can be generated at least once. In practice, we can achieve this by generating all primes up to $k$. For each prime, $p$, we calculate its multiplicity $n$ by requring that $p^n \leq k$.


```python
from sympy import primerange
from math import log

def p005(k):
    n = 1
    for prime in list(primerange(1, k+1)):
        exponent = int(log(k, 10)/log(prime, 10))
        n *= prime**exponent
    return n

for LIMIT in [10, 20]:
    print("")
    print("limit = {}".format(LIMIT))
    print("Result for ndigit = 2: {}".format(p005(LIMIT)))
    %timeit p005(LIMIT)
```

    
    limit = 10
    Result for ndigit = 2: 2520
    12.6 µs ± 410 ns per loop (mean ± std. dev. of 7 runs, 100000 loops each)
    
    limit = 20
    Result for ndigit = 2: 232792560
    26.3 µs ± 850 ns per loop (mean ± std. dev. of 7 runs, 10000 loops each)


The optimisation improves the runtime by more than a factor $10^6$.
